Supernovae are full of mystery. We still don't fully understand what makes them explode. That's partly because they're impossible to predict. We know what type of star is said
to detonate, but have no way of knowing exactly when. In fact, most of the data we have about these spectacular events comes from studying their remnants, in many cases hundreds, if not thousands of years after they began. That or a stroke of dumb luck where we just happened to be looking in the right direction at the right time. But earlier last year, this changed.
We finally captured a supernova as it was exploding, and on purpose. Finding it just hours after it began, this is one of the earliest detections we've ever made, and it's shown us something we've never seen before. The shape of the explosion. It might sound like an unusual thing to get excited about, but this discovery has the power to unlock the inner workings of exploding stars
and answer centuries old conundrums. What are the mysterious mechanisms that drive outward? And why do some supernovae fail? Thanks to new data from the ATLAS survey, we're edging closer to answers. I'm Alex McColgan, and you're watching Astrum. Join me today as we watch a star explode in real time, decode the shape of its blast, and find out what really happens in those critical seconds before a
star rips itself apart. On the night of the 04/10/2024, the ATLAS survey was conducting a routine sweep of the cosmos. It consists of four wide field telescopes positioned around the globe, in South Africa, Chile, and two in Hawaii. Together, they systematically scan the entire night sky every forty eight hours, imaging each region four times in that window. This rapid revisit time helps catch fast moving events as
they happen, and at 03:21AM on the April 11, that's exactly what happened. ATLAS detected something unusual, a single point in the sky, brightening dramatically over the previous five point eight hours. Immediately, this reading triggered the telescope's automated alert system. The news of the unknown transient spread to the astronomical community across the world, who quickly got to work deciphering what it could mean. 23,800,000 light years away, in the
spiral NGC 3,621, a star had just died. What Atlas caught was a type two supernova, right as it happened. Yi Yang from the Tsinghua University in Beijing and his colleagues knew what this meant. It was their chance to see, for the first time, the true shape of a supernova explosion in real time. But they had no time to waste. In addition to being impossible to predict, the
initial breakout period of a supernova explosion is incredibly short lived. Once they go off, their original geometry remains intact for just hours. After that, the ejected material crashes into surrounding gas and dust, warping and obscuring the blast's original shape. The pristine fingerprint of the core collapse, the very thing needed to understand how massive stars die, would be gone forever. So to get a true reading,
the researchers had to act fast. While most of the world slept, Yang and his team worked through the night, drafting an emergency proposal to the European Southern Observatory. They urgently needed time on one of the most powerful instruments on Earth, the Very Large Telescope in Chile. If they were going to measure the shape of the explosion, they had to start gathering data right away. Luckily, Eso immediately approved the request, and
the VLT swung towards Galaxy NDC 3,621. Yang and his team waited, with their hearts in their throats and their eyes locked on their screens. This was the moment of truth. Had they taken too long, would they get a pure reading back, or a scrambled mess of inputs from an already warped explosion? By the slimmest of margins, they'd pulled it off. Precious data started streaming in, painting
a picture of true, undistorted supernova geometry. Yang and his team were witnessing the birth cry of Supernova twenty twenty four GGI and learning at last how the universe makes its most violent fireworks. So good. So good. So good. New spring arrivals are at Nordstrom Rack stores now. Get ready to save big with up to 60% off Rag and Bone, Marc Jacobs, Free People, and more.
How did I not know Rack has Adidas? Because there's always something new. Join the Nordy Club to unlock exclusive discounts, shop new arrivals first, and more. Plus, buy online and pick up at your favorite Rack store for free. Great brands, great prices. That's why you Rack. Get in the game with the college branded Venmo debit card. Wreck your team with every tap and earn up to 5%
cash back with Venmo Stash, a new rewards program from Venmo. No monthly fee, no minimum balance, just school pride and spending power. Get in the game and sign up for the Venmo debit card at venmo.com/collegecard. The Venmo Mastercard is issued by the Bancorp bank NA. Select schools available. Venmo stash terms and exclusions apply at venmo.me/stashterms.
Max $100 cash back per month. Supernovae come in two main types, but we'll focus on type two here, the kind Yang and his team observed. Through a mix of physical theories, astronomical observations and computer simulations, we've managed to build a pretty respectable model of how we think stars die. Models are really important in science, helping us test hypotheses and granting new insights.
But having programmers skilled enough to develop those models is just as important as having the scientists who work with them. And thanks to Brilliant, the sponsor of today's video, those programming skills are readily available to anyone, including me. That's what I really love about Brilliant. I don't consider myself to be much of a programmer, but it's something that I'm interested in. And through Brilliant's intuitive, easy to
grasp interactive courses, like their Thinking in Python course, I've been able to brush up on my skills, helping me gain that foundation to start making programs of my own. Brilliant helps you excel at maths and coding with step by step lessons and personalised practice, designed for anyone aged 10 to 110. Their wide catalogue of courses are expertly crafted by the finest minds at MIT, Harvard and Stanford who know a thing or two about effective learning.
You don't watch videos, but learn by solving problems, which I like as I am something of a hands on learner. See for yourself. To learn for free on Brilliant for a full thirty days, go to brilliant.org/astrum in the description below, or scan this QR code right here. Astrum viewers also get 20% off an annual premium subscription, which gives you unlimited daily
access to everything Brilliant has to offer. Stars spend their lives fusing lighter elements into heavier ones by combining nuclei into more tightly bound configurations. This fusion process releases excess energy, creating an outward pressure that pushes back against the star's own gravity. This keeps the star in a stable, spherical shape. Over billions of years, the star's core works its way up the periodic table, fusing
hydrogen into helium, helium into carbon, carbon into oxygen, neon, magnesium, silicon, and finally, iron. But this is where the chain stops. If you want to fuse iron into something heavier, that reaction won't release energy. It will require an energy import instead. Fe 56 has the lowest mass per nucleon out of every possible nuclear configuration, so every chain of nuclear reactions will ultimately turn every other type of nucleus into Fe
56. Eventually, the star's entire core becomes iron. It's a dead end. With no more energy releasing fusion reactions available, the star has run out of fuel. It stops burning. The outward pressure that has been holding it up against its own gravity disappears. Without that support, the core collapses on itself at breakneck speeds. The outer part of the core can reach velocities of 70,000 kilometers per second, that's
23% the speed of light. The collapse is so violent that it crushes protons and electrons in the inner core into neutrons. It also releases a flood of neutrinos, nearly massless particles that carry away enormous amounts of energy. The collapsing material slams into the newly formed neutron core and rebounds, creating a shockwave that propagates outward at thousands of kilometers per second, a process known as core bounce. But the shockwave doesn't make it
far. Within milliseconds, it stalls nearly 100 to 200 kilometers from the centre as it ploughs through the dense outer iron core. The extreme temperatures and pressures tear the heavy iron nuclei apart into lighter elements like helium, a process that absorbs enormous amounts of energy from the shock. This is the moment where one of two things can happen. If the shock stays stalled for more than about a second, the star will keep
accreting mass until it collapses into a black hole. There's no bang, no brilliant burst, everything slips into the void, a failed supernova. The more common and mysterious alternative is that the shock doesn't stall, it gets revived. Something, neutrinos, jets, magnetic fields or some combination we don't yet understand, transfers enough energy to allow the shock wave to continue and turn the implosion into an explosion. Exactly how this happens remains one of the
biggest unsolved mysteries in astrophysics and is why events like SN twenty twenty four GGI are so tantalising to the scientific community. The shockwave travels up through thousands of kilometres of stellar material. The journey takes several hours until finally, it breaks through the outermost layer of the dying star. This is the breakout phase. As it emerges, the shockwave creates a brilliant flash of ultraviolet and optical light, releasing
huge amounts of energy and heating the star's outer layers to tens of thousands of degrees. It's only at this point that the supernova becomes visible for the first time, reaching peak brightness over the next week or two, and the beginning of this rising brightness is exactly what ATLAS saw in the early morning hours of the 04/11/2024. ATLAS catching SN twenty twenty four GGI as early as it did was a triumph.
But detection was only the opening move. The real work began after the alert went out, a race against the clock to put the right instrument on target before the explosion's original geometry vanished forever. That urgency was exactly why Yang and his team had fought for time on the VLT. They weren't just trying to see the supernova, they were after a very specific signature hidden in its light, something only one instrument could
reveal. Mounted on the VLT is an instrument called FORS two, the only one of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere. It measures spectro polarimetry, how light is polarised across different wavelengths of the visible spectrum. Normally, waves vibrate in all directions perpendicular to their direction of travel. This is unpolarised light. But polarised light has waves that only vibrate in one direction. For example, when sunlight reflects off a flat surface like water or
glass, it becomes partially polarised. It's also why when you put on polarised sunglasses, this glare disappears. They're designed to filter out that kind of polarised light. In the context of SN twenty twenty four GGI, Yang was interested in polarised light because of what it could reveal about the shape of the explosion. A perfectly spherical explosion scatters light equally in all directions, producing no polarisation at all.
An asymmetric explosion on the other hand, one that is symmetrical along one axis, like a football or a peanut shaped explosion, would polarise light in a specific pattern. FORWS two can help scientists decode this pattern. When light enters the instrument, it first passes through a rotating crystal plate that can shift the orientation of the polarised light by a precise amount. By moving this plate to different angles, the instrument effectively rotates
any polarised light, allowing it to measure polarisation in all directions. Next, the light hits a Wollaston prism, a unique optical component which physically separates the incoming beam of light based on the polarization direction. Light waves vibrating in one plane go one way, waves vibrating perpendicular to that go the other way. Each beam is then split into its component colours, creating two side by side spectra
on the detector, one for each polarization orientation. By comparing how bright each wavelength is across the two spectra, astronomers can determine how strongly the light is polarized, and in which direction. Knowing how the light from SN twenty twenty four GGI is polarized tells us the shape of its explosion. From there, we can predict the mechanism that caused it. For over fifty years, scientists have tried to explain the physical processes that revive
a stalled shockwave and trigger a supernova explosion. From the creative rubble emerged two leading ideas. The first says that neutrinos must have something to do with it. We know the core collapse sends huge amounts of neutrinos shooting into space, but in the incredibly dense region just above the neutron star, even neutrinos have trouble getting through. It's thought a tiny fraction of them deposit their energy into the material above the
core, heating it from below. This creates a violent convection. If enough energy accumulates, the shock surges back to life, and the star literally blows its top, exploding furiously. But here's the thing, the convection doesn't heat the neutrinos evenly. State of the art three d simulations led by Bernard Muller at Monash University show these explosions are highly asymmetric, and we've observed real supernovae that fit this model well.
The Casiopea A supernova remnant for example shows an asymmetric distribution of radioactive chemicals like titanium 44 and nickel 56, which trace back to asymmetries present from the onset of the explosion. The second theory says jets are behind the boom instead. The collapsing core forms a rapidly rotating neutron star surrounded by a disk of infalling material. Magnetic fields threading through this disk get wound up and amplified by the rotation,
twisted tighter and tighter like a rubber band. These amplified magnetic fields channel material into two powerful jets shooting out along the star's rotation axis like cosmic blowtorches. They punch through the star's envelope with tremendous force, driving a fundamentally different explosion. In this scenario, the blast would produce axial symmetry along the star's spin. The explosion then expands along this axis, leading to a football shaped or olive shaped
geometry. We've seen this kind of structure in other supernovae like SN twenty twenty three IXF, whose explosion was also organised and elongated. So, what do you think Yang's VLT observations show for SN twenty twenty four GGI? Pause the video and comment below. An explosion if you think it's highly irregular and asymmetric like the neutrino driven model predicts, or an American football if you think it's symmetrical along an axis like the
jet model predicts. So, moment of truth, this is what SN twenty twenty four GGI looked like. The spectro polarimetry data collected by the VLT's Force two revealed a clear, well defined axis of symmetry, and an olive or football shaped explosion technically a prolate ellipsoid. At first, it seemed like a clear win for the jet driven theory. If the explosion were driven by neutrinos, it would have been completely asymmetrical.
Finally, we had the conclusive, observational data we'd always been missing. Case closed, right? If only it were that simple. These models are based on simulations, theoretical physics and extrapolated information from supernovae we caught much later, after the critical breakout phase window shut. The neutrino based model certainly has its shortcomings. A 2015 article from the Royal Astronomical Society showed that three d neutrino driven simulations
produce explosions an entire order of magnitude less than what we've seen observationally, even in the most favourable of conditions. This suggests neutrino heating alone simply isn't enough to explain the blast. The jet driven theories aren't flawless either. Two d models seemingly work well, but when astrophysicists simulate jet driven explosions in three d, something strange happens. A team at Caltech introduced a 1% wobble around the axis of symmetry of a
rapidly rotating magnetized stellar core. That tiny change made the jets unstable. They twisted and kinked, winding around the rotation axis like water streaming out from a garden hose left lying on the ground. Instead of punching cleanly through the star and driving an explosion, the jets produced two misshapen lobes of twisted, highly magnetized material that slowly pushed outward. The explosion never happened. There simply wasn't enough energy to trigger an
explosion. Yet, SN twenty twenty four GGI clearly exploded. So there must be something else going on. Either our models are incomplete, or we've missed something else entirely. The solution might lie in flipping the old theory on its head. What if the fatal wobbling and kinking is actually an essential part of the explosion? If jets rapidly jitter rather than maintain a stable axis, they can't drill a clean
channel through the star like in the classic jet driven model. Instead, they're forced to deposit their energy close to the core, roughly a thousand kilometers from the centre through shock waves. These shock waves create hot, pressurised bubbles that merge and expand, pushing the stellar material outward and driving the explosion. The jets themselves are chaotic and unstable, but the overall explosion geometry remains axially symmetric
just like SN twenty twenty four GGI. Are you stuck staring at your w two? Are tax refund worries holding you back? You probably have FOMO, the fear of messing up. The fix? Using TurboTax on Intuit Credit Karma. They find every credit and deduction to help you get every refund dollar you deserve or your money back. It's time to overcome your fear of messing up and get your taxes done right.
Start filing today in the Credit Karma app. This episode is brought to you by Indeed. Stop waiting around for the perfect candidate. Instead, use Indeed sponsored jobs to find the right people with the right skills fast. It's a simple way to make sure your listing is the first candidate to see. According to Indeed data, sponsored jobs have four times more applicants than non sponsored jobs. So go build your dream team today
with Indeed. Get a $75 sponsored job credit at indeed.com/podcast. Terms and conditions apply. So where does this leave us? Well, SN 2024 GDI definitely showed us that explosions can have organised axial symmetry. And how it arises? Whether through narrow, jittering jets or a magneto rotational mechanism, or something else remains a mystery. We're still unsure what role neutrinos play in explosions like
this, if any. It also raises questions about alternative mechanisms that could cause asymmetrical supernovae like Cassiopeia A and others which don't follow axial symmetry. Are they in fact caused by neutrinos or something else? Which factors determine what kind of explosion occurs? This might come as a shock, but we can't know without more data. SN2024GGI is the only breakout phase we've observed in
such detail and measured in real time. If we could somehow know when and where supernovae were going to explode, we could make a point to track them all and look for the patterns. And that's exactly what researchers plan to do. Thanks to new, full sky surveys like ATLAS becoming increasingly popular, 2025 alone saw the inauguration of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time, NASA's SPHERE
X, and the latest data release of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Astronomers are optimistic that with these new tools, they'll be able to regularly catch supernovae within twenty four hours of explosion. If they notice an object is absent from previous night's images, but then appears within a galaxy, they'll follow-up immediately with spectroscopy to determine the object's characteristics as fast as possible. As more automated survey systems come online worldwide,
our ability to catch transient events in their earliest moments will only continue to improve. SN 2024 GGI showed us our models aren't quite there yet. The next generation of observations should help us find the missing piece and solidify our understanding of how stars all over the universe draw their final breath. And I mean, who wouldn't want to see more supernovae getting caught in their explosive
moments? Thanks for watching. If you've been enjoying Astrum's videos and want to help keep this channel thriving, I want to ask you to take less than a minute to check out the Astrum Patreon. It's not just ad free videos, but it's a way to make Astrum's videos less reliant on sponsors and algorithms. The link is below. Your membership directly helps ensure that future videos can stay independent, high quality, and consistent, created for curiosity, not clicks. Thanks so much for considering it. I'll see you next time. And again, a big thanks to Brilliant for sponsoring this video. Go check them out by clicking their link in the description below.